Katacoda Tutorial : Downsampling and Unlimited Metric Retention for Prometheus (#2840)
thanos-io/thanos: tutorials/katacoda/thanos/2-lts/step2.md

# Step 2 - Installing Thanos sidecar

At the end of this step, we will have running Prometheus instance with sidecar deployed. You can read more about sidecar [here](https://thanos.io/components/sidecar.md/).

## Installation

Here, we will modify our configuration files to include the sidecar.

Click `Copy To Editor` for config to propagate the configs to file.

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_eu1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: eu1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9090']

>   - job_name: 'sidecar'

Author: I have added the configuration in advance as suggested in 1:1 meeting :)

>   - job_name: 'sidecar'

Author: Verification added!

>   - job_name: 'sidecar'

Author: Marking resolved

# Step 2 - Object Storage Configuration

In this step, we will configure the object store and change sidecar to upload to the object-store.

## Running Minio

Now, execute the command

```

> mkdir -p /storage/thanos && docker run -d --name minio -v /storage:/data -p 9000:9000 -e "MINIO_ACCESS_KEY=minio" -e "MINIO_SECRET_KEY=minio123" minio/minio:RELEASE.2019-01-31T00-31-19Z server /data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir -p /storage/thanos && docker run -d --name minio -v /storage:/data -p 9000:9000 -e "MINIO_ACCESS_KEY=minio" -e "MINIO_SECRET_KEY=melovethanos" minio/minio:RELEASE.2019-01-31T00-31-19Z server /data
```

```{{execute}}

## Verification

Now, you should have minio running well.

> To check if the Minio is working as intended, let's check out [here](https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9000-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com/minio/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if the Minio is working as intended, let's [open Minio server UI](https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9000-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com/minio/)
```

Enter the credentials as mentioned below:

**Access Key** = `minio`

> **Secret Key** = `minio123`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Secret Key** = `melovethanos`
```

## Configuration :

The configuration file content :

Click `Copy To Editor` for config to propagate the configs to the file `bucket_storage.yml`:

<pre class="file" data-filename="bucket_storage.yml" data-target="replace">
type: S3
config:
  bucket: "thanos"
  endpoint: "127.0.0.1:9000"
  insecure: true
  signature_version2: true
  access_key: "minio"
  secret_key: "minio123"
</pre>

> Before moving forward, we need to stop the `sidecar container` and we can do so by executing the following command:

Reviewer: Let's explain why

```
docker stop prometheus-0-sidecar-eu1
```{{execute}}

Now, execute the following command :

```

> docker run -d --net=host --rm \

Reviewer: Let's use same --name to be consistent `prometheus-0-sidecar-eu1`

    -v $(pwd)/bucket_storage.yml:/etc/prometheus/bucket_storage.yml \
    -v $(pwd)/test:/prometheus \
    --name sidecar \
    -u root \
    quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.15.0 \
    sidecar \
    --tsdb.path                 /prometheus \
    --objstore.config-file      /etc/prometheus/bucket_storage.yml \
    --prometheus.url            http://127.0.0.1:9090 \
    --http-address              0.0.0.0:19090    \
    --grpc-address              0.0.0.0:19190 && echo "Store API exposed"
```{{execute}}

The flag `--objstore.config-file` loads all the required configuration from the file to ship the TSDB blocks to an object storage bucket, the storage endpoints, and the credentials used.

## Verification

> We can check whether the data is uploaded into `thanos` bucket by visitng [Minio](https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9000-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com/minio/). The stored metrics will also be available in the object storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can check whether the data is uploaded into `thanos` bucket by visitng [Minio](https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9000-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com/minio/). It will take a minute to synchronize all blocks. Note that sidecar by default uploads only "non compacted by Prometheus" blocks. See [this](https://thanos.io/tip/components/sidecar.md/#upload-compacted-blocks) to read more about uploading old data already touched by Prometheus. 

Once all X blocks appear in the minio we are sure our data is backed up. Awesome! 
```

type: S3
config:
  bucket: "thanos"
  endpoint: "minio:9000"
  insecure: true
  signature_version2: true
  access_key: "minio"
  secret_key: "minio123"
</pre>

Before moving forward, we need to stop the already running sidecar, and to do that follow the required steps as mentioned below:

Run the command, here you will see all the running containers:

```
docker ps -a
```{{execute}}

We need to stop the `sidecar container` and we can do so by using the `CONTAINER ID`:

`docker stop <CONTAINER ID>`

**NOTE:** Replace `CONTAINER ID` with the ID of sidecar container.

Now, execute the following command :

```
docker run -d --net=host --rm \
    -v $(pwd)/bucket_storage.yml:/etc/prometheus/bucket_storage.yml \
    -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1_data:/prometheus \
    --name sidecar \
    -u root \
    quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.13.0 \
    sidecar \
    --tsdb.path                 /prometheus \
    --objstore.config-file      /etc/prometheus/bucket_storage.yml \
    --prometheus.url            http://127.0.0.1:9090 \
    --http-address              0.0.0.0:19190    \
    --grpc-address              0.0.0.0:19090 && echo "Store API exposed"

> ```{{execute}}

Author: ```Status: Downloaded newer image for quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.12.2
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.314332266Z caller=main.go:152 msg="Tracing will be disabled"
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.315323453Z caller=options.go:23 protocol=gRPC msg="disabled TLS, keyand cert must be set to enable"
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.31599092Z caller=factory.go:46 msg="loading bucket configuration"
level=error ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.31675817Z caller=sidecar.go:312 err="WAL dir is not accessible. Is this dir a TSDB directory? If yes it is shared with TSDB?: stat /prometheus/wal: no such file or directory"
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.317047487Z caller=sidecar.go:356 msg="starting sidecar"
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.317500027Z caller=intrumentation.go:60 msg="changing probe status" status=healthy
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.317940855Z caller=http.go:56 service=http/server component=sidecar msg="listening for requests and metrics" address=0.0.0.0:19190
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.319108306Z caller=reloader.go:157 component=reloader msg="started watching config file and non-recursively rule dirs for changes" cfg= out= dirs=
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.335330575Z caller=intrumentation.go:48 msg="changing probe status" status=ready
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.335906222Z caller=grpc.go:106 service=gRPC/server component=sidecar msg="listening for StoreAPI gRPC" address=0.0.0.0:19090
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.339649347Z caller=sidecar.go:220 msg="successfully loaded prometheusexternal labels" external_labels="{cluster=\"eu1\", replica=\"0\"}"
level=info ts=2020-09-18T12:14:29.340008875Z caller=intrumentation.go:48 msg="changing probe status" status=ready
```

There is no `WAL` file but Prometheus is generating one, and the above mentioned is the error generated after running this command. Is there any flag in Prometheus by which we can avoid this?

Reviewer: So we might want to add step for creating `wal` directory. It's tedius but directory has to be there. But it can be empty (: 

Sorry! hidden knowledge!

Author: @bwplotka seems here the problem was not related to `wal` directory, I was using the wrong directory name to upload the data :( So sorry !!

> # Step 2 - Installing Thanos sidecar

Reviewer: I think we are repeating steps. Maybe we can start from previous one?

Reviewer: (:
